Add how-to troubleshoot for charm deployments (#953)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/src/charm/howto/troubleshooting.md

App         Version  Status  Scale  Charm       Channel    Rev  Exposed  Message
k8s         1.32.0   active      1  k8s         1.32/beta  179  no       Ready
k8s-worker  1.32.0   active      1  k8s-worker  1.32/beta  180  no       Ready

Unit           Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports     Message
k8s-worker/0*  active    idle   1        10.94.106.154             Ready
k8s/0*         active    idle   0        10.94.106.136   6443/tcp  Ready

Machine  State    Address        Inst id        Base          AZ  Message
0        started  10.94.106.136  juju-380ff2-0  ubuntu@24.04      Running
1        started  10.94.106.154  juju-380ff2-1  ubuntu@24.04      Running
```
In this example we can glean some information. The `Workload` column will show the status of a given service. The `Message` section will show you the health of a given service in the cluster. During deployment and maintenance these workload statuses will update to reflect what a given node is doing. For example the workload may say `maintenance` while message will describe this maintenance as `Ensuring snap installation`.

> During normal operation the Workload should read `active`, the Agent column (which reflects what the Juju agent is doing) should read `idle`, and the messages will either say `Ready` or another descriptive term.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During normal cluster operation the `Workload` column reads `active`, the `Agent` column shows `idle`, and the messages will either read `Ready` or another descriptive term.
```

> ## Verify that the API server is healthy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Verify the API server is health
```

> Fetch the kubeconfig file for a control-plane node(unit) in the cluster by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fetch the kubeconfig file for a control-plane node in the cluster by running the following command:
```

```
juju run k8s/0 get-kubeconfig
```

```{warning}
When running `juju run k8s/0 get-kubeconfig` you retrieve the kubeconfig file that uses the given unit's IP address.
```

Verify that the API server is healthy and reachable by running the following command:

```
kubectl get all
```

> This command lists resources that exist under the default namespace. You should see output similar to the following if the API server is healthy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command lists resources that exist under the default namespace. If the API server is healthy you should see a command output similar to the following:
```

```
NAME                 TYPE        CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE
service/kubernetes   ClusterIP   10.152.183.1   <none>        443/TCP   29m
```

> A typical error message may look like this if the API server can not be reached:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the API server can not be reached, the typical error message looks like this:
```

```
The connection to the server 127.0.0.1:6443 was refused - did you specify the right host or port?
```

> The status of the API server service can be checked by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the status of the API server service by running the following command:
```
(Active voice)

```
juju exec --unit k8s/0 -- systemctl status snap.k8s.kube-apiserver
```

> The logs of the API server service can be accessed by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Access the logs of the API server service by running the following command:
```

```
juju exec --unit k8s/0 -- journalctl -u snap.k8s.kube-apiserver
```

A failure could mean that:
* The API server is not reachable due to network issues or firewall limitations
* The API server on the particular node is unhealthy
* The control-plane node that's being reached is down

> Try reaching the API server on a different unit by retrieving the kubeconfig file with `juju run <k8s/unit#> get-kubeconfig`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try reaching the API server on a different unit by retrieving the kubeconfig file with `juju run <k8s/unit#> get-kubeconfig`. Please replace `#` with the desired unit's number.
```

> ## Verify that the cluster nodes are healthy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Investigating a cluster nodes' health
```

> Verify that the nodes in the cluster are healthy by running the following command and checking if all of the nodes have the `Ready` status:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm that the nodes in the cluster are healthy by looking for the `Ready` status:
```

```
kubectl get nodes
```

## Troubleshooting an unhealthy node

> There are certain services running on each node of a {{product}} cluster which are required. The required services depend on the type of node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every healthy {{ product }} node has certain services up and running. The required services depend on the type of node.
```

> Services running on both types of nodes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Services running on both the control-plane and worker nodes:
```

* `k8sd`
* `kubelet`
* `containerd`
* `kube-proxy`

> Services running only on control-plane nodes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Services running only on the control-plane nodes:
```

* `kube-apiserver`
* `kube-controller-manager`
* `kube-scheduler`
* `k8s-dqlite`

> Services running only on worker nodes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Services running only on the worker nodes:
```

* `k8s-apiserver-proxy`

SSH to the unhealthy node by running the following command:

```
juju ssh <k8s/unit#>
```

Check the status of these services on the failing node by running the following command:

```
sudo systemctl status snap.k8s.<service>
```

> The logs of a failing service can be checked by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the logs of a failing service by executing:
```

```
sudo journalctl -xe -u snap.k8s.<service>
```

If the issue indicates a problem with the configuration of the services on the node, examine the arguments used to run these services.

> The arguments of a service on the failing node can be examined by reading the file located at `/var/snap/k8s/common/args/<service>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The arguments of a service on the failing node can be examined by reading the file located at `/var/snap/k8s/common/args/<service>`.
```

> ## Verify that the system pods are healthy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Investigating system pods' health
```

 INFO:  Service k8s.containerd is running
 INFO:  Service k8s.kube-proxy is running
 INFO:  Service k8s.k8s-dqlite is running
 INFO:  Service k8s.k8sd is running
 INFO:  Service k8s.kube-apiserver is running
 INFO:  Service k8s.kube-controller-manager is running
 INFO:  Service k8s.kube-scheduler is running
 INFO:  Service k8s.kubelet is running
Collecting registry mirror logs
Collecting service arguments
 INFO:  Copy service args to the final report tarball
Collecting k8s cluster-info
 INFO:  Copy k8s cluster-info dump to the final report tarball
Collecting SBOM
 INFO:  Copy SBOM to the final report tarball
Collecting system information
 INFO:  Copy uname to the final report tarball
 INFO:  Copy snap diagnostics to the final report tarball
 INFO:  Copy k8s diagnostics to the final report tarball
Collecting networking information
 INFO:  Copy network diagnostics to the final report tarball
Building the report tarball
 SUCCESS:  Report tarball is at /home/ubuntu/inspection-report.tar.gz
```

This script confirms that the services are running, and the resulting report file can be viewed to get a detailed look at every aspect of the system.

## Collecting debug information

> To collect comprehensive debug output from your {{product}} cluster, install and run [juju-crashdump][] on a computer that has the Juju client installed, with the current controller and model pointing at your {{product}} deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To collect comprehensive debug output from your {{product}} cluster, install and run [juju-crashdump][] on a computer that has the Juju client installed. Please ensure that the current controller and model are pointing at your {{product}} deployment.
```

```
sudo snap install juju-crashdump --classic --channel edge
juju-crashdump -a debug-layer -a config
```

> Running the `juju-crashdump` script will generate a tarball of debug information that includes systemd unit status and logs, Juju logs, charm unit data, and Kubernetes cluster information. It is recommended that you include this tarball when filing a bug.

Reviewer: Add a systemd docs link and also consider adding one for the juju-crashdump docs

> Running the `juju-crashdump` script will generate a tarball of debug information that includes systemd unit status and logs, Juju logs, charm unit data, and Kubernetes cluster information. It is recommended that you include this tarball when filing a bug.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running the `juju-crashdump` script will generate a tarball of debug information that includes systemd unit status and logs, Juju logs, charm unit data, and Kubernetes cluster information. Please include the generated tarball when filing a bug.
```

* The API server on the particular node is unhealthy
* The control-plane node that's being reached is down

Try reaching the API server on a different unit by retrieving the kubeconfig file with `juju run <k8s/unit#> get-kubeconfig`. Please replace `#` with the desired unit's number.

## Check the cluster nodes' health

Confirm that the nodes in the cluster are healthy by looking for the `Ready` status:

```
kubectl get nodes
```

You should see a command output similar to the following:

```
NAME            STATUS   ROLES                  AGE     VERSION
juju-380ff2-0   Ready    control-plane,worker   9m30s   v1.32.0
juju-380ff2-1   Ready    worker                 77s     v1.32.0
```

## Troubleshooting an unhealthy node

Every healthy {{ product }} node has certain services up and running. The required services depend on the type of node.

Services running on both the control plane and worker nodes:
* `k8sd`
* `kubelet`
* `containerd`
* `kube-proxy`

Services running only on the control-plane nodes:
* `kube-apiserver`
* `kube-controller-manager`
* `kube-scheduler`
* `k8s-dqlite`

Services running only on the worker nodes:
* `k8s-apiserver-proxy`

> SSH to the unhealthy node by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SSH into the unhealthy node by running:
```

Unit           Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports     Message
k8s-worker/0*  active    idle   1        10.94.106.154             Ready
k8s/0*         active    idle   0        10.94.106.136   6443/tcp  Ready

Machine  State    Address        Inst id        Base          AZ  Message
0        started  10.94.106.136  juju-380ff2-0  ubuntu@24.04      Running
1        started  10.94.106.154  juju-380ff2-1  ubuntu@24.04      Running
```
Interpreting the Output:
- The `Workload` column shows the status of a given service.
- The `Message` section details the health of a given service in the cluster. 
- The `Agent` column reflects any activity of the Juju agent.

During deployment and maintenance the workload status will reflect the node's activity. An example workload may display `maintenance` along with the message details: `Ensuring snap installation`.

During normal cluster operation the `Workload` column reads `active`, the `Agent` column shows `idle`, and the messages will either read `Ready` or another descriptive term.

## Test the API server health

Fetch the kubeconfig file for a control-plane node in the cluster by running:

```

> juju run k8s/0 get-kubeconfig

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
juju run k8s/leader get-kubeconfig | yq .kubeconfig > cluster-kubeconfig.yaml
```

```

```{warning}

> When running `juju run k8s/0 get-kubeconfig` you retrieve the kubeconfig file that uses the given unit's IP address.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When running `juju run k8s/leader get-kubeconfig` you retrieve the kubeconfig file that uses one of the unit's  public IP addresses in the kubernetes endpoint. This endpoint ip can be overriden by providing a `server` argument if the api is exposed through a load-balancer. 
```

```

Verify that the API server is healthy and reachable by running:

```

> kubectl get all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kubectl --kubeconfig cluster-kubeconfig.yaml get all
```

```
NAME                 TYPE        CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE
service/kubernetes   ClusterIP   10.152.183.1   <none>        443/TCP   29m
```

A typical error message may look like this if the API server can not be reached:

```
The connection to the server 127.0.0.1:6443 was refused - did you specify the right host or port?
```

Check the status of the API server service:

```
juju exec --unit k8s/0 -- systemctl status snap.k8s.kube-apiserver
```

Access the logs of the API server service by running:

```
juju exec --unit k8s/0 -- journalctl -u snap.k8s.kube-apiserver
```

A failure can mean that:
* The API server is not reachable due to network issues or firewall limitations
* The API server on the particular node is unhealthy
* The control-plane node that's being reached is down

Try reaching the API server on a different unit by retrieving the kubeconfig file with `juju run <k8s/unit#> get-kubeconfig`. Please replace `#` with the desired unit's number.

## Check the cluster nodes' health

Confirm that the nodes in the cluster are healthy by looking for the `Ready` status:

```

> kubectl get nodes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kubectl --kubeconfig cluster-kubeconfig.yaml get nodes
```

```

## Troubleshooting an unhealthy node

Every healthy {{ product }} node has certain services up and running. The required services depend on the type of node.

Services running on both the control plane and worker nodes:
* `k8sd`
* `kubelet`
* `containerd`
* `kube-proxy`

Services running only on the control-plane nodes:
* `kube-apiserver`
* `kube-controller-manager`
* `kube-scheduler`
* `k8s-dqlite`

Services running only on the worker nodes:
* `k8s-apiserver-proxy`

SSH into the unhealthy node by running:

```
juju ssh <k8s/unit#>
```

Check the status of the services on the failing node by running:

```
sudo systemctl status snap.k8s.<service>
```

Check the logs of a failing service by executing:

```
sudo journalctl -xe -u snap.k8s.<service>
```

If the issue indicates a problem with the configuration of the services on the node, examine the arguments used to run these services.

The arguments of a service on the failing node can be examined by reading the file located at `/var/snap/k8s/common/args/<service>`.

## Investigating system pods' health

Check whether all of the cluster's pods are `Running` and `Ready`:

```

> kubectl get pods -n kube-system

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kubectl --kubeconfig cluster-kubeconfig.yaml get pods -n kube-system
```

```

The pods in the `kube-system` namespace belong to {{product}}' features such as `network`. Unhealthy pods could be related to configuration issues or nodes not meeting certain requirements.

## Troubleshooting a failing pod

Look at the events on a failing pod by running:

```

> kubectl describe pod <pod-name> -n <namespace>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kubectl --kubeconfig cluster-kubeconfig.yaml describe pod <pod-name> -n <namespace>
```

```

Check the logs on a failing pod by executing:

```

> kubectl logs <pod-name> -n <namespace>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kubectl --kubeconfig cluster-kubeconfig.yaml logs <pod-name> -n <namespace>
```
